# The Python Tutorial
[python 2.7 tutorial](https://docs.python.org/2/tutorial/index.html)

[Python 的 14 张思维导图](https://blog.csdn.net/csdnnews/article/details/78248699)

[Python tips](https://pythontips.com/)

---
# I. Modules: #
## collections
### counter: A Counter is a dict subclass for counting hashable objects. It is an unordered collection where elements are stored as dictionary keys and their counts are stored as dictionary values. 
- Elements are counted from an iterable or initialized from another mapping (or counter):
```python
from collections import Counter
c = Counter()                           # a new, empty counter
c = Counter('gallahad')                 # a new counter from an iterable
c = Counter({'red': 4, 'blue': 2})      # a new counter from a mapping
c = Counter(cats=4, dogs=8)             # a new counter from keyword args

## Counter objects support three methods beyond those available for all dictionaries:

```

---
---
# II. Doc #
## 5. Data Structures
### 5.1 More on Lists
[Data Structures](https://docs.python.org/2/tutorial/datastructures.html)
```python
 |  append(...)
 |      L.append(object) -- append object to end
 |  
 |  count(...)
 |      L.count(value) -> integer -- return number of occurrences of value
 |  
 |  extend(...)
 |      L.extend(iterable) -- extend list by appending elements from the iterable
 |  index(...)
 |      L.index(value, [start, [stop]]) -> integer -- return first index of value.
 |  insert(...)
 |      L.insert(index, object) -- insert object before index
 |  pop(...)
 |      L.pop([index]) -> item -- remove and return item at index (default last).
 |      Raises IndexError if list is empty or index is out of range.
 |
 |  remove(...)
 |      L.remove(value) -- remove first occurrence of value.
 |      Raises ValueError if the value is not present. |      Raises ValueError if the value is not present.
 |  reverse(...)
 |      L.reverse() -- reverse *IN PLACE*
 |  sort(...)
 |      L.sort(cmp=None, key=None, reverse=False) -- stable sort *IN PLACE*;
 |      cmp(x, y) -> -1, 0, 1
```

#### 5.1.2 Using Lists as Stacks
```python
>>> stack = [3, 4, 5]
>>> stack.append(6)
>>> stack
[3, 4, 5, 6]
>>> stack.pop()
6
>>> stack
[3, 4, 5]
```

#### 5.1.2 Using Lists as Queues
It is also possible to use a list as a queue, where the first element added is the first element retrieved (“first-in, first-out”); however, lists are **not** efficient for this purpose. While appends and pops from the end of list are fast, doing inserts or pops from the beginning of a list is slow (because all of the other elements have to be shifted by one).
To implement a queue, use **collections.deque** which was designed to have fast appends and pops from both ends. For example:
```python
>>> from collections import deque
>>> queue = deque(["Eric", "John", "Michael"])
>>> queue.append("Terry")           # Terry arrives
>>> queue.popleft()                 # The first to arrive now leaves 'John'
>>> queue                           # Remaining queue in order of arrival
deque(['Michael', 'Terry', 'Graham'])
```

#### 5.1.3 Functional tools
- *filter(function, sequence)* returns a sequence consisting of those items from the sequence for which function(item) is true. 
```python
>>> def f(x): return x % 3 == 0 or x % 5 == 0
... 
>>> filter(f, range(2, 25))
[3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 12, 15, 18, 20, 21, 24]
```

- *map(function, sequence)* calls function(item) for each of the sequence’s items and returns a list of the return values. 
```python
>>> def cube(x): return x*x*x
... 
>>> map(cube, range(1, 11))
[1, 8, 27, 64, 125, 216, 343, 512, 729, 1000]
```

More than one sequence may be passed; the function must then have as many arguments as there are sequences and is called with the corresponding item from each sequence (or None if some sequence is shorter than another)
```python
>>> def add(x, y): return x+y
... 
>>> map(add, range(1,10,2), range(1,15,3))
[2, 7, 12, 17, 22]
```

- *reduce(function, sequence)* returns a single value constructed by calling the binary function function on the first two items of the sequence, then on the result and the next item, *and so on*. 
A third argument can be passed to indicate the starting value.
```python
>>> def add(x, y): return x+y
... 
>>> reduce(add, range(1, 11))
55
```

#### 5.1.4. List Comprehensions
- List comprehensions provide a concise way to create lists. 
```python
squares = [x**2 for x in range(10)]
```
- A list comprehension consists of brackets containing an expression followed by a for clause, then zero or more for or if clauses.
```python
>>> [(x, y) for x in [1,2,3] for y in [3,1,4] if x != y]
[(1, 3), (1, 4), (2, 3), (2, 1), (2, 4), (3, 1), (3, 4)]

>>> freshfruit = ['  banana', '  loganberry ', 'passion fruit  ']
>>> [weapon.strip() for weapon in freshfruit]
['banana', 'loganberry', 'passion fruit']

```

```python
>>> matrix = [ [1, 2, 3, 4], [5, 6, 7, 8], [9, 10, 11, 12]]
>>> [[row[i] for row in matrix] for i in range(4)]
[[1, 5, 9], [2, 6, 10], [3, 7, 11], [4, 8, 12]]
```

### 5.2 del statement
There is a way to remove an item from a list given its index instead of its value: the del statement. 
```python
>>> l = [0, 1, 2, 3]
>>> del l[1:2]
>>> l
[0, 2, 3]
>>> del l[:]
>>> l
[]
>>> del l
>>> l
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
NameError: name 'l' is not defined
```

### 5.3 Tuples and Squences
Tuples are immutable. the output of tuples are always enclosed in parentheses, so that nested tuples are interpreted correctly; they may be input with or without surrounding parentheses, although often parentheses are necessary anyway (if the tuple is part of a larger expression). It is not possible to assign to the individual items of a tuple, however it is possible to create tuples which contain mutable objects, such as lists.


### 5.4 Sets
Python also includes a data type for sets. A set is an unordered collection with no duplicate elements.
Basic uses include fast membership testing and eliminating duplicate entries. Set objects also support mathematical operations like union, intersection, difference, and symmetric difference.
Curly braces or the set() function can be used to create sets. 

```python
>>> a
set(['a', 'r', 'b', 'c', 'd'])
>>> {x for x in 'abracadabra' if x not in 'abc'}
set(['r', 'd'])

>>> basket = ['apple', 'orange', 'apple', 'pear', 'orange', 'banana']
>>> fruit = set(basket)               # create a set without duplicates
>>> fruit
set(['orange', 'pear', 'apple', 'banana'])
>>> 'orange' in fruit                 # fast membership testing
True
>>> 'crabgrass' in fruit
False

>>> # Demonstrate set operations on unique letters from two words
...
>>> a = set('abracadabra')
>>> b = set('alacazam')
>>> a                                  # unique letters in a
set(['a', 'r', 'b', 'c', 'd'])
>>> a - b                              # letters in a but not in b
set(['r', 'd', 'b'])
>>> a | b                              # letters in either a or b
set(['a', 'c', 'r', 'd', 'b', 'm', 'z', 'l'])
>>> a & b                              # letters in both a and b
set(['a', 'c'])
>>> a ^ b                              # letters in a or b but not both
set(['r', 'd', 'b', 'm', 'z', 'l'])
```

### 5.5 Dictionaries
The dictionaries are indexed by keys, which can be any immutable type;
strings and numbers can always be keys.
Think of a dictionary as an unordered set of key: value pairs, with the
requirement that the keys are unique (within one dictionary). 
The main operations on a dictionary are storing a value with some key and extracting the value given the key.
```python
>>> tel = {'jack': 4098, 'sape': 4139}
>>> tel['guido'] = 4127
>>> del tel['sape']
>>> tel['irv'] = 4127
>>> tel
{'guido': 4127, 'irv': 4127, 'jack': 4098}
>>> tel.keys()
['guido', 'irv', 'jack']
>>> 'guido' in tel
True
```

The dict() constructor builds dictionaries directly from sequences of key-value pairs:
```python
>>> dict([('sape', 4139), ('guido', 4127), ('jack', 4098)])
{'sape': 4139, 'jack': 4098, 'guido': 4127}
```

### 5.6 Looping Techniques
- When looping through a sequence, the position index and corresponding value can be retrieved at the same time using the *enumerate()* function.
```python
>>> for i, v in enumerate(['tic', 'tac', 'toe']):
...     print i, v
...
0 tic
1 tac
2 toe
```

- When looping through dictionaries, the key and corresponding value can be retrieved at the same time using the iteritems() method.

- It is sometimes tempting to change a list while you are looping over it; however, it is often **simpler and safer** to create a new list instead.

## 6. Modules
A module is a file containing Python definitions and statements.
[Modules](https://docs.python.org/2/tutorial/modules.html)

### 6.1 More on Modules
Note For efficiency reasons, each module is only imported once per interpreter session. Therefore, if you change your modules, you must restart the interpreter – or, if it’s just one module you want to test interactively, use reload(), e.g. reload(modulename).

#### 6.1.1. Executing modules as scripts
If the module is imported, the code is not run.

With the __name__ set to "__main__" by adding this code at the end of your module:
```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    import sys
    fib(int(sys.argv[1]))
```
You can make the file usable as a script as well as an importable module.

#### 6.1.2. The Module Search Path
When a module named spam is imported, the interpreter **first** searches for a built-in module with that name. If not found, it then searches for a file named spam.py in a list of directories given by the variable **sys.path**.  sys.path is initialized from these locations:

- the directory containing the input script (or the current directory).
- PYTHONPATH (a list of directory names, with the same syntax as the shell variable PATH).
- the installation-dependent default.

It could append path in sys.path by sys.path.append(<your_path>)

#### 6.1.3. “Compiled” Python files
As an important speed-up of the start-up time for short programs that use a lot of standard modules, if a file called spam.pyc exists in the directory where spam.py is found, this is assumed to contain an already-“byte-compiled” version of the module spam. The modification time of the version of spam.py used to create spam.pyc is recorded in spam.pyc, and the .pyc file is ignored if these don’t match.

Whenever spam.py is successfully compiled, an attempt is made to write the compiled version to spam.pyc. 
The contents of the spam.pyc file are **platform independent**, so a Python module directory can be shared by machines of different architectures.

Some tips for experts:

- When the Python interpreter is invoked with the -O flag, optimized code is generated and stored in .pyo files. The optimizer currently doesn’t help much; it only removes assert statements. When -O is used, all bytecode is optimized; .pyc files are ignored and .py files are compiled to optimized bytecode.
- Passing two -O flags to the Python interpreter (-OO) will cause the bytecode compiler to perform optimizations that could in some rare cases result in malfunctioning programs. Currently only __doc__ strings are removed from the bytecode, resulting in more compact .pyo files. Since some programs may rely on having these available, you should only use this option if you know what you’re doing.
- A program **doesn’t run any** faster when it is read from a .pyc or .pyo file than when it is read from a .py file; the only thing that’s faster about .pyc or .pyo files is the speed with which they are loaded.
- When a script is run by giving its name on the command line, the bytecode for the script is never written to a .pyc or .pyo file. Thus, the startup time of a script may be reduced by moving most of its code to a module and having a small bootstrap script that imports that module. It is also possible to name a .pyc or .pyo file directly on the command line.
- It is possible to have a file called spam.pyc (or spam.pyo when -O is used) without a file spam.py for the same module. This can be used to distribute a library of Python code in a form that is moderately hard to reverse engineer.
- The module compileall can create .pyc files (or .pyo files when -O is used) for all modules in a directory.

### 6.2 Standard Modules
Python comes with a library of standard modules (Python Library Reference). Some modules are built into the interpreter; these provide access to operations that are not part of the core of the language but are nevertheless built in, either for efficiency or to provide access to operating system primitives such as system calls. 

The variable *sys.path* is a list of strings that determines the interpreter’s search path for modules. It is initialized to a default path taken from the environment variable PYTHONPATH, or from a built-in default if PYTHONPATH is not set. You can modify it using standard list operations:
```python
>>> import sys
>>> sys.path.append('/ufs/guido/lib/python')
```

### 6.3 The dir() Function
The built-in function dir() is used to find out which names a module defines. It returns a sorted list of strings:
```python
>>> import sys
>>> dir(sys)
```

Without arguments, dir() lists the names you have defined currently:
```python
>>> dir()
```

dir() does **not** list the names of built-in functions and variables. If you want a list of those, they are defined in the standard module *__builtin__*:
```python
>>> dir(__builtin__)
```

### 6.4 Packages
Packages are a way of structuring Python’s module namespace by using “dotted module names”.  For example, the module name A.B designates a submodule named B in a package named A.

The *__init__.py* files are required to make Python treat the directories as containing packages; this is done to prevent directories with a common name, such as string, from unintentionally hiding valid modules that occur later on the module search path. In the simplest case, __init__.py can just be an empty file, but it can also execute initialization code for the package or set the *__all__* variable, described later.

Users of the package can import individual modules from the package, for example:
```python
import sound.effects.echo
```
This loads the submodule sound.effects.echo. It must be referenced with its **full name**.
```python
sound.effects.echo.echofilter(input, output, delay=0.7, atten=4)
```

An alternative way of importing the submodule is:
```python
from sound.effects import echo
```
This also loads the submodule echo, and makes it available without its package prefix, so it can be used as follows:
```python
echo.echofilter(input, output, delay=0.7, atten=4)
```

**Note:** that when using *from package import item*, the item can be either a submodule (or subpackage) of the package, or some other name defined in the package, like a function, class or variable. The import statement first tests whether the item is defined in the package; if not, it assumes it is a module and attempts to load it. If it fails to find it, an ImportError exception is raised.

Contrarily, when using syntax like *import item.subitem.subsubitem*, each item except for the last must be a package; the last item can be a module or a package but **can’t** be a class or function or variable defined in the previous item.


#### 6.4.1 Importing * From a Package
The import statement uses the following convention: if a package’s *__init__.py* code defines a list named *__all__*, it is taken to be the list of module names that should be imported when from package import * is encountered. 
```python
__all__ = ["echo", "surround", "reverse"]
```
This would mean that from sound.effects import * would import the three
named submodules of the sound package.

If *__all__* is not defined, the statement *from sound.effects import \** does not import all submodules from the package sound.effects into the current namespace; it *only* ensures that the package sound.effects has been imported (possibly running any initialization code in __init__.py) and then imports whatever names are defined in the package.


## 7 Input and Output
### 7.1 Fancier Output Format

Python has ways to convert any value to a string: pass it to the repr() or str() functions.
For objects which don’t have a particular representation for human consumption, str() will return the same value as repr(). Many values, such as numbers or structures like lists and dictionaries, have the same representation using either function. 
Strings and floating point numbers, in particular, have two **distinct**
representations.

```python
>>> for x in range(1,11):
...   print '{0:2d} {1:3d} {2:4d}'.format(x, x*x, x*x*x)
... 
 1   1    1
 2   4    8
 3   9   27
 4  16   64
...

```

Basic usage of the str.format() method looks like this:
```python
>>> print 'We are the {} who say "{}!"'.format('knights', 'Ni')
We are the knights who say "Ni!"

>>> print '{0} and {1}'.format('spam', 'eggs')
spam and eggs

>>> print '{1} and {0}'.format('spam', 'eggs')
eggs and spam

>>> print 'The story of {0}, {1}, and {other}.'.format('Bill', 'Manfred', other='Georg')
The story of Bill, Manfred, and Georg.
```

An optional ':' and format specifier can follow the field name. 
```python
>>> import math
>>> print 'The value of PI is approximately {0:.3f}.'.format(math.pi)
The value of PI is approximately 3.142.

>>> table = {'Sjoerd': 4127, 'Jack': 4098, 'Dcab': 7678}
>>> for name, phone in table.items():
...   print '{0:10} ==> {1:10d}'.format(name, phone)
... 
Dcab       ==>       7678
Jack       ==>       4098
Sjoerd     ==>       4127
>>>


```

### 7.2 Reading and Writing Files
open() returns a file object, and is most commonly used with two arguments: open(filename, mode).
```python
>>> f = open('/Users/luyi/iGitHub/test.c','r');

```

#### 7.2.1 Methods of File Objects

readline([size]) -> next line from the file, as a string.
Retain newline.  A non-negative size argument limits the maximum
number of bytes to return (an incomplete line may be returned then).
Return an empty string at EOF.


read([size]) -> read at most size bytes, returned as a string.

If the size argument is negative or omitted, read until EOF is reached.
Notice that when in non-blocking mode, less data than what was requested
may be returned, even if no size parameter was given.

loop over the file object. This is **memory efficient**, fast, and leads to simple code
```python
>>> for line in f:
        print line,
```

If you want to read all the lines of a file in a list you can also use *list(f)* or *f.readlines()*.


To write something other than a string, it needs to be converted to a string first:
```python
>>> value = ('the answer', 42)
>>> s = str(value)
>>> f.write(s)

>>> f = open('workfile', 'r+')
>>> f.write('0123456789abcdef')
>>> f.seek(5)      # Go to the 6th byte in the file
>>> f.read(1)
'5'
>>> f.seek(-3, 2)  # Go to the 3rd byte before the end
>>> f.read(1)
'd'

```

It is good practice to use the with keyword when dealing with file objects. 
```python
>>> with open('workfile', 'r') as f:
...     read_data = f.read()
>>> f.closed
True
```

#### 7.2.2 Saving structured data with json
Numbers take a bit more effort, since the read() method only returns strings, which will have to be passed to a function like int(), which takes a string like '123' and returns its numeric value 123. When you want to save more complex data types like nested lists and dictionaries, parsing and serializing by hand becomes complicated.

The standard module called json can take Python data hierarchies, and convert them to string representations; this process is called serializing.

If you have an object x, you can view its JSON string representation with a simple line of code:
```python
>>> json.dumps([1, 'simple', 'list'])
'[1, "simple", "list"]'
```

Another variant of the dumps() function, called dump(), simply serializes the object to a file. So if f is a file object opened for writing, we can do this:
```python
json.dump(x, f)
```

To decode the object again, if f is a file object which has been opened for reading:
```python
x = json.load(f)
```
This simple serialization technique can handle lists and dictionaries, but serializing arbitrary class instances in JSON requires a bit of extra effort. The reference for the json module contains an explanation of this.


## 8. Errors and Exceptions
Errors detected during execution are called exceptions and are not unconditionally fatal
### 8.2 Exceptions
[Built-in Exceptions](https://docs.python.org/2/library/exceptions.html#bltin-exceptions)

### 8.3 Handlin Exceptions
The try statement works as follows:

- First, the try clause (the statement(s) between the try and except keywords) is executed.
- If no exception occurs, the except clause is skipped and execution of the try statement is finished.
- If an exception occurs during execution of the try clause, the rest of the clause is skipped. Then if its type matches the exception named after the except keyword, the except clause is executed, and then execution continues after the try statement.
- If an exception occurs which does not match the exception named in the except clause, it is passed on to outer try statements; if no handler is found, it is an unhandled exception and execution stops with a message as shown above.

## 9. Classes
### 9.1 Names and objects
Objects have individuality, and multiple names can be bound to the same object.(aliasing)

### 9.2 Scopes and Namespaces
namespace examples:

-   built-in names: is created when the Python interpreter starts up, and is never deleted.
-   global names: is created when the module definition is read in
-   local names: is created when a function is called, deleted when function returned or raise exception

*attribute*: for anyname following a dot (read-only or writable)
*attribute reference*: references to names in modules

*scope* is a textual region where a namespace is directly accessible.
namespace are accessible:

- the innermost scope, which is searched first, contains the local names
- the scopes of any enclosing functions, which are searched starting with the nearest enclosing scope, contains non-local, but also non-global names
- the next-to-last scope contains the current module’s global names
- the outermost scope (searched last) is the namespace containing built-in names

A special quirk of Python is that – if no global statement is in effect – assignments to names always go into the innermost scope. Assignments **do not** copy data — they just **bind names to objects**. The same is true for deletions: the statement del x **removes the binding** of x from the namespace referenced by the local scope. In fact, all operations that introduce new names use the local scope: in particular, import statements and function definitions bind the module or function name in the local scope. 

### 9.3 Class
#### namespace
- A namespace is a mapping from names to objects
    samples: built-in, global, local
    there is absolutely no relation between names in different namespaces;
    in the expression z.real, real is an attribute of the object z
- namespaces are created at different moments and have different lifetimes 
    The namespace containing the built-in names is created when the Python interpreter starts up, and is never deleted.
    global namespace for a module is created when the module definition is read in
    The local namespace for a function is created when the function is called, and deleted when the function returns or raises an exception that is not handled within the function. recursive invocations each have their own local namespaces
- at any time during execution, there are at least three nested scopes whose namespaces are directly accessible:
    + the innermost scope, which is searched first, contains the local names
    + the scopes of any enclosing functions, which are searched starting with the nearest enclosing scope, contains non-local, but also non-global names
    + the next-to-last scope contains the current module’s global names
    + the outermost scope (searched last) is the namespace containing built-in names

- A special quirk of Python is that – if no global statement is in effect – assignments to names always go into the innermost scope. Assignments do not copy data — they just bind names to objects. 
#### 9.3.1 Class Definition
```python
class ClassName:
    <statement-1>
    <statement-N>
```

When a class definition is entered, a new namespace is created, and used as the local scope — thus, all assignments to local variables go into this new namespace.

#### 9.3.2 Class Objects
Class objects support two kinds of operations: atttribute references and instantiation.

- *atttribute references* 
>obj.name

- *instantiation*
> x = MyClass()
creates a new *instance* of the class and assigns this object to the local variable x.

The instantiation operation (“calling” a class object) creates an empty object. Many classes like to create objects with instances customized to a specific initial state. 
Therefore a class may define a special method named __init__(), like this:
```python
def __init__(self):
    self.data = []
```
When a class defines an __init__() method, class instantiation automatically invokes __init__() for the newly-created class instance.
```python
class Complex:
    def __init__(self, realpart, imagpart):
        self.r = realpart
        self.i = imagpart

x = Complext(1.0, -4.5)
x.r, x.i
```

#### 9.3.3 Instance Objects
two kinds of valid attribute names: *data attributes* and *methods*

#### 9.3.4 Method Objects
*x.f()* is exactly equivalent to *MyClass.f(x)*.

#### 9.3.5 Class and Instance Variables
```python
class Dog:
    kind = 'canine'         # class variable shared by all instances
    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name    # instance variable unique to each instance
>>> d = Dog('Fido')
>>> e = Dog('Buddy')
>>> d.kind                  # shared by all dogs
'canine'
>>> e.kind                  # shared by all dogs
'canine'
>>> d.name                  # unique to d
'Fido'
>>> e.name                  # unique to e
'Buddy'
```

Be careful when use class variable, special for the mutable objects, such as *lists* and *dictionaries*.

### 9.4 Random Remarks
Possible conventions include capitalizing method names, prefixing data attribute names with a small unique string (perhaps just an underscore), or using verbs for methods and nouns for data attributes.

Methods may call other methods by using method attributes of the `self` argument:
```python
class Bag:
    def __init__(self):
        self.data = []

    def add(self, x):
        self.data.append(x)

    def addtwice(self, x):
        self.add(x)   ## call other method attributes of the class
        self.add(x)
```

### 9.5 Inheritance

```python
class DerivedClassName(BaseClassName):
    <statement-1>
    .
    .
    .
    <statement-N>
```
This is used for **resolving attribute references**: if a requested attribute is not found in the class, the search proceeds to look in the base class. This rule is applied recursively if the base class itself is derived from some other class.

#### 9.5.1 Multiple Inheritance
```python
class DerivedClassName(Base1, Base2, Base3):
    <statement-1>
    .
    .
    .
    <statement-N>
```
